Deep within the heart of Asian Russia,
a 640 kilometer long gigantic lake
is connecting the Sayan and Stanovoy
Mountains of southern Siberia. This is Lake
Baikal. And while it's not the largest lake
in the world, its geographical quirks and
peculiarities easily make it the most unique one.
In this video we will first have a
look at lake Baikal's key geographical
features and see how it compares to
the other great lakes of this planet,
before diving deeper into its origin
story and its extraordinary anomalies.
Chapter 1: Lake Baikal in Numbers
With an area of just under 32 thousand square
kilometers, or roughly the size of Belgium, Lake
Baikal ranks as the 7th largest lake in the world,
just after the Caspian Sea and the North American
and African Great Lakes. But where it lacks in
surface area, Lake Baikal compensates in depth.
Lying at an elevation of 450 meter above sea
level, the deepest point of the lake bottom
reaches to almost 1200 meter below the sea level,
giving lake Baikal a total depth of 1640 meter
and making it the deepest lake in the world.
This combination of depth, area, and steep,
canyon-like walls have collected an immense
volume of water within the lake's boundaries.
Coming from the South and East, the Selenga,
Bargusin and Upper Angara River are draining a
large chunk of northern Mongolia and the Russian
Republic of Buryatia into the lake, giving
it a volume larger than all the water in the
American Great Lakes combined and constituting
22% of all surface freshwater on planet earth.
While lying on the southern outskirts of the
Siberian tundra, the climate around the lake
is no less arctic. Winter temperatures average
a quite uncomfortable -21°C or -6° Fahrenheit,
with a summer average in August barely
surpassing 11° Celsius or 52° Fahrenheit.
These rough climatic conditions, paired
with the mountainous surroundings of
the lake are a big factor for the seemingly
complete absence of significant developments
around the lake. Only 40 towns have sprung up
along the over 2.000 kilometer long shoreline with
just a single one of these reaching over 20.000
residents. The ones that do permanently live here,
have often done so since the early iron
age, like on Baikal's largest Island,
Olkhon. Around 1750 Buryats call this rocky
outcrop their home, practicing shamanism and
Buddhism, far away from the stereotypical
Russian culture. The land they live on,
with 800 meter steep drops plunging from the
highest point of the island into Lake Baikal is
also a perfect depiction of the tectonic past of
the region, which has created this natural wonder
in the first place, bringing us to
Chapter 2: Lake Baikal's Creation
The topographic composition of earth's surface
is constantly changing. But in this never ending
dance of the elements, with erosion from wind
and water, the unstoppable march and retreat
of glaciers, volcanic eruptions or even human
activity there is one shaping factor like no
other and it's this one, which stands behind
the creation of Lake Baikal.
Plate Tectonics
The typical map of the world's plate boundaries
used for studying in schools, is typically a
bit of an oversimplification, with many microplates
and rift zones being left out.
Especially around the Pacific Ring of Fire. Incorporating
these as well however, quickly reveals
the tectonic activity which has shaped these
inner Asian mountain ranges, and Lake Baikal.
Around the north-western boundary of the
Amurian microplate, a combination of divergent
and transform plate movements are separating it
from the Eurasian tectonic plate with around 4mm
per year. The combination of these motions is
the cause for regular earthquakes in the region,
whenever the fault zone slips from the lateral
movement. At the same time the divergent movement
thins out the continental plates along the rift,
significantly increasingthe occurrence of geothermal
features around Lake Baikal, which is one of the primary
tourist attractions of the region, and major
earthquakes which have devastated parts of Russia,
Mongolia and even China can be drawn back to
this plate boundary. With the advent of GPS,
the speed of the plates can be tracked
quite accurately today, and knowing that
the divergence occurs at roughly 3-4mm per
year, the creation of the lake as a whole
can be traced back to around 25 to 30 million
years ago. This has also been confirmed with
deep boreholes into the lake bed, where millions
of years of sediment strata have been unearthed,
which also gives a detailed insight into
climatic developments of the distant past.
With this age, having originated roughly
halfway between now and the extinction of
the non-avian dinosaurs, Lake Baikal is actually
considered an ancient lake and according to the
most common consensus, it is the oldest lake that
is currently sitting on earth's surface. There is
one other contender in eastern Kazakhstan whose
age is estimated at around 70 million years,
but a lack of evidence for Lake
Zaysan still favors Lake Baikal.
So far we have covered that Lake Baikal is
the deepest, most voluminous and also the oldest
lake of the planet, but there are actually
many more peculiarities about the pearl of
Siberia where it is so different from the typical
lakes, which we will have a closer look at in
Chapter 3: Oddities of Lake Baikal
A large catchment area and hundreds
of smaller streams are continuously feeding into
Lake Baikal, with these inflows making up 85% of
its water budget in a typical year, while the rest
is covered by direct precipitation onto the lake.
Once the water enters into the hollow, it has a
typical residence in the lake of over 300 years,
before the average molecule gets flushed out
again through its only outlet, the Angara River.
In this time, the water is exposed to the harsh subpolar climate
of Siberia, and undergoes a distinct annual cycle.
Starting in deep winter, when lake Baikal
is covered with a solid slab of ice,
the water temperature at the surface hovers around
freezing and then gradually increases towards 3.8°
Celsius at a depth of around 200 meters. As spring
comes around the ice masses on the surface slowly
recede and the upper layers of water quickly
heat up. At a certain moment in early June,
the temperature distribution throughout theentire
lake homogenizes at around 4°C,
during which time the oxygen-rich waters of
the surface sink to the bottom of the lake,
supplying all stratas with vital oxygene.
Once summer is in full swing, the temperature
stratification completely reverses with
the surface measuring averages of 16°
celsius while the lake layers below
200 meters remain at a chilly 3.8°.
This annually recurring pattern with
two complete water exchanges between
the surface and lake bottom, has ensured a
robust food web to exist within the lake,
in which copepods create a self cleaning ecosystem
and in which no one species of algae can blossom
too excessively. These filter feeders, which
are even devouring plankton when the lake is
frozen over completely, together with generally
low levels of phosphorus and nitrogen, actually
create some of the clearest water in the world,
with total dissolved solids only contributing
96 mg per liter of lake water. For reference, the
World Health Organization recommends levels below
500 for drinking water, and the US tap water
only averages TDS levels of around 350 mg/l.
The low turbidity also allows for exceptional
views into the lake while it is frozen over
for nearly half the year. With a typical ice
thickness of 1 to 1.5 meter, or 3 to 5 feet,
it is completely safe to traverse the frozen
wasteland even by car during peak winter. The
combination of rapid freezing and harsh winds
on the ice surface also create some mesmerizing
formations across the surface, ranging from
methane bubble columns to pedestals for rocks
and icicles, which has propelled lake Baikal as
a winter tourist destination in recent years.
During the summer, the interest of tourists shifts
more to the mountainous surroundings of the lake,
which has over time been protected more and
more. While the Soviet Union wasn’t particularly
known for protecting their lakes, looking at what they
have done to theAral Sea for example,
Lake Baikal has been treated way better
in the past century. The first nature reserve
of the entire country was set up on the north
eastern shoreline, around the delta of the river
Barguzin in 1916, and many more nature reserves,
national parks and game reserves followed
in the coming century, which now protects
over 50% of Lake Baikal's shoreline.
Despite all these efforts however,
economic prospects are continuously
challenging nature preservation. So far,
local and international activist groups have
successfully rerouted a proposed oil pipeline
along the earthquake-prone shoreline of Lake
Baikal, whose leakage into the lake could
have detrimental impacts on the biota. Further a
pulp and paper mill, which has dumped production
waste and bleach straight into the lake for nearly half a
century hasbeen closed since 2013 due to bankruptcy,
and while the 15.000 tons of toxic waste which
has been dumped into the lake dilutes well through
the vast volume, some changes through
the last decades have been noticed.
The expansion of putrid algae, and the
disappearance of several endemic fish and
sponge species are a byproduct of the local
pollution but, also the general warming of
the climate and lake water, which throws off
the intricate ballet of water and sediments.
How global warming will further impact these
developments can not be said right now,
but one thing is for sure. The fragile cycles
of flora, fauna and the water itself have stood
the test of time for 30 million years now
and the lake will not disappear any time
soon. The question is rather how the beauty and
magnificence of this Siberian giant can bring
prosperity to the region without damaging it and
how it will adapt to the future that lies ahead.
I hope you learned something from this overview
of Lake Baikal. If you want to learn more about
the region where the Baikal’s waters are
coming from, I can recommend this video
about the geography of Mongolia, or watch
what YouTube thinks is best for you here.
See you in the next one, cheers